OCC 2025 (Day 0) Non-Stop Compiling
====================================

Today was a fairly quiet day, mostly hanging around IRC and checking out on
everyone's progress.

First thing I did today was remove the 1GB SO-DIMM I was using on the iBook G4,
the one that decided to reject my brand new SSD upgrade and waste an entire
afternoon. This stick of RAM was previously in the PowerBook G4 12" that I'm
currently typing this in. The process was easy and straight forward, the
complete opposite of the hard drive replacement.

While I'm in the subject of typing, the keyboard on this laptop is absolutely
phenomenal. If I could only have a single keyboard on a laptop until I die, this
would absolutely be it. It's simply that great.

In summary I spent the whole day compiling things since I didn't prepare for the
challenge, with my CPU hovering around 100% utilization for the entire day. I
guess this is my punishment for not preparing for the challenge.


First try with MacPorts
-----------------------

My compilation journey started when I decided to install a newer version of
Apache and PHP to be able to work on my website on this machine, since OS X 10.4
ships with an ancient version of Apache and PHP 4.

This decision led me down a MacPorts rabbit hole that I'm still currently in. At
first MacPorts decided it needed to build icu, which took roughly 3 hours
(really puts modern CPUs in perspective), then while it was building Apache, it
decided to fail to run the configure script with the following message:

    configure:6549: checking for -pcre2-config
    configure:6584: result: no
    configure:6549: checking for -pcre-config
    configure:6584: result: no
    configure:6598: checking for pcre2-config
    configure:6633: result: no
    configure:6598: checking for pcre-config
    configure:6633: result: no
    configure:6651: error: Did not find working script at /opt/local

Clearly it couldn't find 'pcre-config', the only problem is that it was in the
PATH, and running 'which' told me it was located at /opt/local/bin, so it
should've found it, it's clearly looking at the right directory, although for
some reason it was failling.

As a quick fix I went inside the ports tree and edited the Portfile for apache2
to point directly to /opt/local/bin. This fixed the error and allowed MacPorts
to continue to the build phase.


Second try with MacPorts
------------------------

After that weird issue with the configure step I was feeling a bit worried, but
also hopeful that it was small bug and nothing else. I was terribly wrong. After
a long while the build failed with the following log:

    :info:build /usr/libexec/gcc/powerpc-apple-darwin8/4.0.1/ld:
        .libs/mod_authn_file.o has external relocation entries in non-writable
        section (__TEXT,__text) for symbols:
    :info:build _apr_palloc
    :info:build _ap_cfg_getline
    :info:build _apr_password_validate
    :info:build _ap_cfg_closefile
    :info:build _ap_getword
    :info:build _strcmp
    :info:build _ap_log_rerror_
    :info:build _ap_pcfg_openfile
    :info:build restGPRx
    :info:build _apr_dynamic_fn_retrieve
    :info:build _ap_hook_optional_fn_retrieve
    :info:build _ap_register_auth_provider
    :info:build collect2: ld returned 1 exit status
    :info:build make[4]: *** [mod_authn_file.la] Error 1

This was very problematic, as it was clearly one of those errors that only
happens when your build environment is broken and possibly compiled different
packages with different versions of GCC, which may have been the case, since
this is a fairly old MacPorts installation and I have upgraded it last year if
I remember correctly.

I tried countless incantations and build/configure settings in the Portsfile,
nothing could fix this error. I have successfully built other pieces of software
today with the same toolchain, so I don't know what is wrong, but I'll blame
Apache nonetheless.


Third try manually
------------------

I finally decided that this fancy MacPorts thing wasn't happening and that maybe
compiling an older release manually would be more fruitful, and boy was I right!

Downloaded a version of Apache from around the end of 2018, the same year that
PHP 5.6, the version of PHP I want to run, was deemed EOL, and it compiled
almost right away, it only required a small tweak to the environment variable
that deals with the OS X deployment target, otherwise it would fail with the
following log:

    /opt/local/share/apr-1/build/libtool --silent --mode=link
        /opt/local/bin/gcc-apple-4.2 -std=gnu99 -L/opt/local/lib/db48
        -L/opt/local/lib -o mod_authn_file.la -rpath /usr/local/apache2/modules
        -module -avoid-version mod_authn_file.lo 
    /usr/libexec/gcc/powerpc-apple-darwin8/4.0.1/ld: flag: -undefined
        dynamic_lookup can't be used with MACOSX_DEPLOYMENT_TARGET environment
        variable set to: 10.1
    collect2: ld returned 1 exit status
    make[4]: *** [mod_authn_file.la] Error 1

Which is interesting, because it failed with the same file during the linking
step, meaning this error could have something to do with the issue in the newer
version. If anyone can figure this one out please let me know.

Either way it clearly didn't like the fact that it was trying to target OS X
10.1, an ancient version of the operating system. Changing the environment
variable to 10.4 when running 'make' fixed the issue and allowed the program to
compile all the way to the end. If anyone wants to replicate this successful
build, here is a nice shell script for you:

    #!/bin/sh
    curl -O https://archive.apache.org/dist/httpd/httpd-2.4.37.tar.gz
    tar zxf httpd-2.4.37.tar.gz
    cd httpd-2.4.37/
    ./configure --enable-mods-shared=all --enable-ssl --enable-cache \
        --enable-disk_cache --enable-file_cache --enable-mem_cache \
        --enable-deflate --enable-proxy --enable-proxy-connect \
        --enable-proxy-http --enable-proxy-ftp
    MACOSX_DEPLOYMENT_TARGET=10.4 make
    sudo make install

This got me a working Apache 2 install and the warm and comforting "It works!"
welcome page.


Conclusion
----------

It was a pretty slow day, mostly doing the preparation that I should've done
previously but was unable to, still it was an enjoyable day and it was fun to
hang around IRC. I guess the goal for tomorrow is to build PHP 5.6 and run my
website from this beautiful laptop.

Tomorrow will sadly be a very intensive "work day", so I won't be able to
dedicate myself to OCC and will be forced to use a modern computer so I'm not
fired, but I'll make an effort to use the old PowerBook whenever possible.